# Week 05 (2025-09-22)
## *John Rawls: A Theory of Justice*
John Rawls attempts to create a justification for a welfare state from the liberal position and argues in favor of the creation of the social safety net through the "maximin" principle. Wealth redistribution poses a justificatory challenge to those believing in liberalism, since invariably the creation of a welfare state which redistributes money is at face value a violation of one's right to both liberty and property insofar that the government chooses how one's money is spent and does not guarantee individuals full ownership of material wealth.
##### Veil of Ignorance
* There exists an **original position** where individuals, in isolation, are given the agency to define the size of the state.
* In this position, people make choices through the veil of ignorance and select political principles according to their own self interest **without knowing what their social status will be,** while also somehow still understanding general rules regarding economics, politics and human behavior.
* Rawls argues that from this veil of ignorance individuals will agree upon the **maximin principle,** the state is characterized as ensuring that the lowest class of individuals have the best quality of life (i.e., according to this principle, if there are three nations each with a upper, middle and lower class, the nation where the lower class has the highest quality of life is best).
##### Principles.
The risk-averse nature of these agents leads to the formation of three agreed-upon principles with hierarchical priority (lexical priority):
1. **Basic Liberty Principle:** Everyone is guaranteed their natural rights, and the freedom of political expression and ability to run for office, and protection against arbitrary arrest.
2. **Fair Equality of Opportunity:** The state should create a level field for everyone to act in, so that people born with the same talents and motivations can achieve similar levels of financial or social success. This implies equal access to education, healthcare, transportation, housing, and protection against discrimination on the basis of morally arbitrary qualities (e.g., skin color).
3. **Difference Principle:** That inequality that exists in society can only be justified if it is somehow benefiting those who are the least advantaged. Trickle-down economics comes to mind, the "inventor" of the internet, for instance, can be significantly wealthier than the rest of society should his invention confer great benefits specifically down to the lowest class of people.

According to Rawls, these rights can only be guaranteed through the existence of the welfare state; a centralized authority, for instance, may be the only way to reliably maintain one's natural right to life, and the social safety net would be responsible for providing equal access to social resources in situations where a free market may find no incentive to do so.
##### Objections
* **Epistemological Limits:** Rawls' arguments often rest upon the basis that a centralized authority will know what is the best way to go about maximizing the lowest class, or perhaps, that they can even foresee the future. In a world where there exists finite labor and resources, it may be dangerous to assume that the government would be precise in knowing the best way to maximize utility. The U.S. government, for instance, saw it as fit in the 19th century to subsidize the construction of canals whilst failing to consider the benefits in safety and efficiency that the train offered.
* **Harm Through Incentives:** Individuals may be discouraged from creating wealth if they feel that they do not have an absolute right to property. If a rational agent possesses a great amount of wealth, and they believe that the state may seize it through taxation, they may spend the money in a manner which is irretrievable and does not provide any benefit to the lowest class, such as going on luxurious vacations.
* **Conflict of Interest:** It is unclear how the difference/maximin principles work when improving one class of people is at the detriment of the class adjacent to it in quality of life. Let's assign the lowest class of society, $x$, a utility of $x=1$. The second lowest class, $y$, with a utility of $y=2$. The difference and maximin principles do not seem to offer a framework for if improving the quality of life for class $x$ to $x=2$ required decreasing the welfare of class $y$ to $y=1$, since it would appear that the maximin principle here would simply lead to an endless cycle of attempts to improve one group and then the other.
## *Shiffrin - Incentives, Motives*
Seana Shiffrin tries to illustrate how incentivization of talent and justification of inequality by Rawls through concepts like the difference principle miss the point. While her material does not directly advocate for socialism, she draws upon concepts that vaguely resemble those of figures like Marx, arguing that standard justifications for strong material incentives in capitalist and Rawlsian schemes are morally suspect. Her arguments rest primarily on the **moral arbitrariness of talent and ability.**
##### Incentives Encourage the Morally Arbitrary
According to Shiffrin, I do not own any of my natural talents since I did not choose to have them. Obviously, there is the aspect of individual effort that is necessary to improve one's talents and make them useful, but Shiffrin could easily argue that determination and effort is in itself a talent which is indeterminate of the individual. 
* Because of the moral arbitrariness of natural talents (i.e., I didn't do anything to earn them), I'm not entitled to pay that is any higher than that of anyone else in my field, or even in any other profession.
* If it is morally correct to use your talents to help others, then self-determining the value of your labor at an arbitrarily high price is inappropriate.
According to Shiffrin, the free market and other incentive-based systems institutionalize and reward the worst motive for using one's talents for good: selfishness. When this is embedded into society, it becomes an immutable part of the moral psychology of the people. This in itself is a critique of both capitalism and Rawls' difference principle, which permits inequality since it would supposedly incentivize people with talents to work harder.
##### Kidnapping Example
The kidnapping example is a strong analogy for why this incentivization is inappropriate:
* Your child has been kidnapped, and a passerby has the ability to rescue the child with little cost to themself.
* However, they will only help pay to rescue them if you pay a massive sum of money.

The example shows why Shiffrin believes that you, the parent, are not morally required to give the reward, and likewise, they are not morally required to demand it, as the premise that a duty of rescue can be converted into a market transaction is morally objectionable, particularly because the passerby can help the child when there is almost no cost at all.
##### Objections
* It would seem that Shiffrin's framework would only apply to those who have talents that are actually morally relevant, i.e., the kidnapping example is a situation in which there lies a moral justification for why the passerby should help rescue the child without robbing you. But I can't see how this would be applied to those who have talents in disciplines which are not life-or-death scenarios. The **video game industry,** for instance, is arbitrary insofar that it's existence does not directly save people's lives (like how doctors and surgeons might). Because of the supposed arbitrary nature of their talent, digital modelers or game designers aren't entitled to self-determine the value of their labor. The moral argument used in Shiffrin's kidnapping example isn't as strong in this situation though since the consumer doesn't lose much if they choose not to pay for their service, while the person who provides the service depends on the consumer's business to survive. The subsequent implication following Shiffrin's logic is that in such a situation the consumer would volunteer the transaction with the game designer because it is of little cost to themself while it is a matter of the game designer having a living. But it could be argued that this would lead to peoples' limited amounts of wealth being invested into a service that ultimately doesn't provide any tangible value in the same way that paying a doctor for your medical bills does. 
* Shiffrin makes the strong assumption that our natural talents do not belong to us since it's impossible for us to "select" them before we are born. Similarly, we do not choose what parents we have, the conditions that our parents live in when we're born, or the political or social climates that exist during our upbringing. This has some strong implications for our self-determination though since, as mentioned before, the ability to invest effort into talent is in itself, a talent. If this is the case, why invest any time or effort into talent whatsoever, since it's not necessarily the individual's choice to do so, it's instead the responsibility of the conditions they were born into.
## *Harsanyi - Utilitarianism*
Unlike Shiffrin, Harsanyi builds a case for utilitarianism and the welfare state starting from the original position, similar to Rawls. However, he reaches a different conclusion because of his total rejection of the maximin principle.
* **Unreliability of Maximin:** When taken literally, the maximin principle leads to absurd conclusions and makes every day tasks impossible since it's intrinsically an extreme form of risk aversion. If maximin is applied literally, it becomes rational to work a minimum wage job in New York, even if there's the possibility for a million dollar job in Chicago, because there exists a trivial yet positive possibility that the flight to Chicago could crash, killing you.
* **Unreliability of Difference Principle:** The issues with maximin carry over to the difference principle since this risk-averse perspective forces society to give absolute priority to the interests of the worse-off individual, even if society would be overall better if resources were allocated to increasing the overall welfare of those who have the capacity to re-invest their talent back into society. Take, for instance, the ivy league universities, which enable gifted people to engage in deep innovation and research, but take federal funding away from the funding of public preschools in underprivileged communities. The difference principle would make this impossible and force the government to allocate all spending to helping the poor communities. Even if, for any reason, the marginal utility granted to these communities was small in comparison to the benefits conferred to the college students, the difference principle necessitates that society spend all its money on the preschools.
##### EUT Maximization Principle
The Expected Utility Maximization Principle is the alternative that Harsanyi proposes to Rawls' theory of justice. Whereas Rawls assumes that within the original position agents are unaware of the probability that they will end up in the lowest class of society, Harsanyi simply uses the equiprobability assumption to assign the probability of $\frac{1}{n}$ to being in each class, where $n$ is the number of societal classes. The result is that Harsanyi's proposal of the social contract resembles utilitarianism where each person's perspective is given equal weight in calculating overall marginal utility, in contrast to Rawls where the worst-off person is given veto power since they have to contend with the worst possible outcome.
## *Carens - The Case for Open Borders*
Carens provides justification for open national borders from both the utilitarian and libertarian perspectives given the **global application,** treating all people from all parts of the world as morally relevant with equal weight.
##### Utilitarianism-Liberalism
* Utilitarianism is a school of thought that tries to maximize overall well-being. Subsequently, the utilitarian justification can be summarized as maximizing the marginal utility of those living outside developed nations.
* The inconveniences caused to domestics because of an influx of immigration are significantly less than the benefit provided to those who come from less developed nations.
* Furthermore, in some instances (like with the United States, allegedly according to statistics) immigration tends to increase total economic output, benefiting native workers in the long run.

There are some issues with the utilitarian justification, such as the infamous brain drain issue where intelligence is exported out of a less developed nation (look towards Russia and the U.S. or Malaysia and Singapore), which would actually decrease the welfare of those living in the host countries. But if the government can restrict international mobility on the account of this brain drain issue, the government should subsequently be allowed to restrict internal movement. For instance, if the city of Detroit has only one neurosurgeon, a utilitarian government would prevent that neurosurgeon from moving to Columbus since they are conferring great benefits on those living in the city.
* But if viewed through Rawls' liberal justification for utilitarianism and the welfare state, lexical priority would not permit such a restriction due to fair equality of opportunity and principles of natural rights.
	* But wouldn't fair equality of opportunity require that a neurosurgeon exist in that city so that all people from all parts of the country have equal access to healthcare?

Another issue is the tension between open borders and the welfare state. [MILTON FRIEDMAN](http://genius.cat-v.org/milton-friedman/) has argued that the welfare state and open borders cannot coexist, since the welfare state could not discriminate against who to provide its services to. And with this system, foreigners could simply come to the state, receive medical treatment, and then leave, without paying for medical fees. The only way to resolve this conflict would to be to allow the welfare state to restrict its services, protecting the welfare state from being easily exploited, but this violates fair equality of opportunity.
##### Libertarianism
Libertarianism is a school of thought that adheres to guaranteeing people the right to life, liberty and property. Closed borders violate these natural rights in a number of ways:
* **Property rights:** A core principle of property rights in libertarianism, freedom of contract, is breached by closed borders, since it restricts the mobility of labor. It is generally considered in both schools of libertarianism that a voluntary exchange between parties is the essence of a free state. However, such an exchange is disrupted if the state has the authority to challenge such transactions by preventing the transfer of property, goods or services (in this case, labor).
* **Liberty:** Although not necessarily provided by Carens, closed borders are presumably a breach of the right to liberty since restriction of mobility is inherently, from the libertarian perspective, an arbitrary restriction on what people are allowed to do. Another way to frame it is if domestic labor is willing to provide a service at $20/hour, and foreign labor is willing to provide a service at $10/hour, it is rational for the employer to hire foreign labor. But closed borders prevent this and effectively set a price floor at $20/hour. Likewise, if domestic supply for a service is limited (e.g., people don't want to work a particular job), but there is tons of foreign demand to provide that service, closed borders would make this impossible. 