## Scott Shapiro, *Legality* Chapter 2
Shapiro discusses the difficulties in the formation of a contract that defines law:
- Some body has power to create legal norms iff an existing norm confers that power.
- A norm conferring power possesses the authority to create legal norms iff a body with power dictates that he has the power to do so.
If there exists a state of nature in accordance with Thomas Hobbes's definition, "no assertion of legal authority is compatible with the Chicken and Egg principles without resorting to vicious circles or infinite regress". Shapiro defines this "chicken-and-egg" problem as the **possibility puzzle.**
##### Puzzle
- **A Body That Detracts From the Need for an Elected Sovereign:** If there exists a body which has authority, and it is not the case that his authority is derived from some other "norm", the chicken-and-egg principle is made irrelevant. The classic natural law view is that God exists, and subsequently, as the creator of the natural law, he confers unto rulers the legal right to rule. Furthermore, this perspective detracts from moral authority being derived from some other norm or power, but rather, the legality conferred unto people is the product of his authority.
- **Post-Enlightenment View:** Instead of being derived from God, the People have the moral authority to direct their communal lives as they see fit. Moral authority is derived from political authority. Because political authority is agnostic of "society" insofar as it being separate from anyone's own "creation", there is no need for one to derive political authority from another body.
- **Power:** Legal authority is simply derived from whoever has the most power, the one who has the greatest ability to coerce others into following his rule. However, unlike the previous two solutions, this would mean that the possibility of law is not immutable; the body who possesses authority may not be persistent.
##### Other Notes
Naturalism vs. Positivism: Is the possibility of law derived from inherent universal ethical principles, meaning that law is a reflection of moral truths, or is law derived from empirical evidence and logical reasoning that is agnostic of the need for inherent ethicality?

Hume's law asserts that one cannot normative statements (obligatory) from descriptive statements (it is the case). Shapiro uses the example of a father and a toddler; if the father tells the toddler to do something, the toddler may reply with, "Why should I?". The father may respond with, "Because I am your father", or "Because children always listen to their parents". The so-called DINO pattern (descriptive in, normative out) violates Hume's law. Factual premises, subsequently, cannot lead to normative conclusions. 

This does mean that neither naturalism nor positivism are possible, since a legal philosopher who believes that all law is derived from naturalism overlooks the existence of legal systems that are mutually agreed to have been evil, for instance, the laws conferred until the citizens of Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union, while laws derived from positivism must deal with the fact that obligations cannot be derived from simple factual statements.