# Week 09 (2025-10-27)
## *Robert Nozick: Anarchy, State, Utopia (Distributive Justice)*
##### Entitlement Theory
* **Justice in Acquisition:** One who acquires something in accordance with the principles of justice is entitled to that good.
* **Justice in Transfer:** If both parties consent to an exchange, a good or property can be legitimately exchanged, provided that coercion or deception plays no part in this exchange.
* **Justice in Rectification:** If the principles of justice are violated in a transaction, the state reserves the right to "rectify" this misdemeanor, which may entail redistribution.
##### Justification of Property Rights
Nozick struggles to justify the existence of property rights; the most common justification for natural right to property is the labor theory, which states that **mixing labor with resources automatically confers ownership.**
* If Nozick were to go out of the way to pour a can of tomato juice into the ocean as a form of labor, would that entitle him to the ocean?
He proposes that adding **value** to property justifies one's rights to it; if one builds a fence and plants crops on a plot of land, they have added value to it, and by extension, own it. But by this logic, removing value from property should waive one's right to that property (e.g., buying a house, only to spray paint it a garish color, making it worth less than before).

**Nozick's arguments subsequently strictly concern justice in transfer, not acquisition. Justice in transfer cannot create new property rights, only perpetuate those that exist already.**
##### Wilt Chamberlain Argument
Argument that Nozick uses to illustrate the patterned principles of just distribution as **incompatible with liberty**
* There exists a society with wealth distribution D1 in accordance with Rawls' difference principle (wealth distributed in a way that maximizes utility of the lowest class)
* There exists Wilt Chamberlain, an extremely popular basketball player in this society
* All people are willing to freely give Chamberlain 25 cents to watch him play basketball over the course of a season
* No other transactions occur.
The result is that Chamberlain has **$250,000,** a significantly larger sum of money than anyone else in society. Despite this wealth inequality, and this new "D2" not being ordered by D1, D2 is still a just distribution, since each agent willingly exchanged their portion of D1 to create D2, and we know that D1 was itself a just distribution. Nozick states that this shows that just distribution is incompatible with liberty, since in order to preserve distribution D1, the state must perpetually interfere with people's ability to freely exchange their D1 shares.
##### Taxation
Nozick views taxation as a form of forced labor and poses the reader with the leisure example; there are two individuals, one who must work a longer period of time to posses the money necessary to purchase a movie ticket, and the other who spends his evening watching a sunset. According to Nozick, there is no difference between taxation (i.e., seizing of the first man's wealth) and forced labor (i.e., if the man watching the sunset was forced to work instead).
# Week 10 (2025-11-03)
## *Fried, Wilt Chamberlain Revisited*
Barbara Fried's arguments against Nozick's "Wilt Chamberlain" model represents an issue with Nozick's views on wealth and individual property rights, that being if **one owns the full market value of what they transfer.**
##### Surplus Value
Surplus value is the gap between market value of a product and the cost of producing it.  
* The volatility of the market value of a good illustrates perhaps why Fried believes that one should not necessarily own the full market value of what they transfer. Look at the used car market around the pandemic. 
* The general rule is that the value of a car depreciates over time, losing market value as the mileage increases and parts begin to fail. This doesn't mean that the cost of producing the car has decreased necessarily, but rather that the market value has just decreased. 
* But during the pandemic, the value of used cars increased as a result of increasing demand and inelastic supply, which leads to prices increasing to resolve potential shortages. Fried argues that these market-based gains aren't morally self-justifying, since market behavior is not always within one's control. 
Nozick's Wilt Chamberlain argument simply assumes, without any justification, that Wilt already owns the full market value of his talents. Similar to the car example, Chamberlain's own talents, are a morally arbitrary quality; one cannot choose what qualities they have at birth.
##### Libertarian Taxation
Fried's arguments ultimately point towards this idea that one does not own the surplus value of what they produce, if one does not put in the market value level of effort to produce something, they aren't entitled to it.
* If taxation is taking what is the market value and not the production cost, it is not theft. There is subsequently a divide between left and right-wing libertarianism: the left believes that one only has the right to production cost, but the right says that one has the right to the market value.
* Fried argues that a person's wealth is not entirely the result of their own volition. Infrastructure such as the public education system, transportation systems and construction of buildings are often times provided by the state. Often times, individuals take advantage of these resources to create their own wealth and most of the time do not create wealth "off the grid". If this is the case, there does not really exist private property, its more just shared between the individual and the state, one's assets are diluted between its creator and contributors.
##### Value in Acquisition & Transfer
* Fried believes that the rights you gain in acquisition of property are only inclusive of the value one adds to them, not the total value of the property. Research this further: (what kind of value is she referring to, production costs or market value?)
##### Caveats
* **Law of Demand:** For some reason, Fried seemingly overlooks the role that the law of demand plays in the market. Unfortunately for her, the implications of this entitlement to production value are difficult to justify. For instance, if production costs are higher than the market value, as they can be in many scenarios, the logical conclusion is that the producer is subsequently owed compensation for the production cost. Since this wealth cannot come from the producer, since they are operating at a loss when the market value is lower than the production cost, the most likely place this money comes from is through taxes. This does not resemble a free market since this exchange isn't voluntary as such a transaction would only occur if it took place at the market value.
* **Intellectual Property:** The concept of intellectual property is one that should be considered it's own separate category. But it would seem that Fried's views on property and intellectual property are incompatible. As Milton Friedman puts it:

> [!FRIEDMAN]
> *“For one thing, there are many “inventions” that are not patentable. The “inventor” of the supermarket, for example, conferred great benefits on his fellowmen for which he could not charge them. Insofar as the same kind of ability is required for the one kind of invention as for the other, the existence of patents tends to divert activity to patentable inventions.”*

Open-source projects and free software, such as Linux/BSD and the GNU project, for instance, are disseminated for free with the intention of making them as accessible as possible. However, complexities arise when taking into account how these technologies are used commercially (in the case of Red Hat, Ubuntu, SUSE, etc.). Fried's perspective would necessitate that a kind of taxation is owed to the Linux foundation, an approach which is taken by the GPL, but under permissive licenses which do not necessitate re-contributing one's own developments upstream, the implication is that the surplus value created by these enterprises can be taxed regardless of if the technology is given away under a license like MIT or BSD.

Similar issues are demonstrated under current-day articles like Article 107 which protects "Fair Use", where an idea that is derived from another idea is protected for being a transformative work, but according to Fried, such a derivative would be subjected to a kind of tax since they do not fully own the property or labor that was used in its creation.
# Week 11 (2025-11-10)
## *Boxill, A Lockean Case for Reparations*
Boxill's arguments for reparations rests on Nozick's third aspect of entitlement theory, that there must be **justice in rectification:** a violation of one's natural rights to life, liberty or property (e.g., labor) can and will be rectified by the state.
* Slavery is an obvious theft of labor, since this kind of labor has not been justly acquired. In the United States, the Transatlantic Slave Trade constitutes a kind of abduction of individuals living outside the country. Within the United States, slaves have no individual rights, subsequently, they are not entitled to life, liberty or property so long as slavery is perpetuated.
* In accordance with libertarian principles, the logical conclusion is that reparations must be made since there is no justness in how slaves were acquired, nor is there justness in how they have been "transferred".
##### Corrective Justice
* Boxill's frames reparations in the context of corrective justice, concerning compensation that damage has caused to the victims of a unjust transaction or transgression. For one, people can sue each other if they believe they are the victim of a transgression that violates their natural rights. If a man runs over a woman, the woman reserves the right to sue the man and seek compensation for the damages caused.
	* It does not concern retributive justice, which concerns **punishment for the transgressors.**
	* It also does not concern **distributive justice,** which concerns equality and egality of wealth.
	* Both of these forms of justice are common arguments for contemporary political views of reparations. This is irrelevant to the libertarian justification for reparations, which is focused exclusively on the damages caused to the victim of such a transgression.
##### Temporal Framing/Counterfactuals
* While corrective justice is sound in the case of a short-term injustice, intergenerational framing complicates this because of the **counterfactuals: the concept of alternate history.** The most direct problem is that rectifying the transgression involves conceptualizing an alternate timeline where the transgression never occurred. The result is:
1. **The Non-Identity Problem:** Timelines in which the descendant of the transgression never existed, and:
2. **Worse-off Dispositions:** timelines in which the descendant of the transgression exists, but is in a worse-off position in the current day.
	* For instance, if a counterfactual timeline posits that the Transatlantic Slave Trade never existed or was illegal, it is possible that Africans may have never immigrated to the United States (regardless of their volition in doing so). 
	* Generally, the GDP per capita of African-Americans, living in the United States, is significantly higher than the GDP per capita of Africans living in the continent of Africa.
	* Therefore, restoring the position of the victims of this transgression results in a worse-off outcome for these individuals.
##### Boxill's Inheritance Argument
* Boxill's argument mostly addresses the first issue, that being the non-identity problem. To summarize, so long as the debt is unpaid, the transgression of slavery persists and continues to persist insofar that the descendants of former slaves who have not received any compensation.
* In the US, slavery was outlawed in 1865, this would necessitate slavery as a transgression, and debt would subsequently be owed to all former slaves. But by 1866, no debt has been paid. This is in itself a transgression. The result is that by 2025 all descendants of slaves have still not been compensated, and the transgression of unpaid debt applies in the modern day.
* Normally, if the issue of reparations to descendants of ex-slaves is framed as an "inheritance", the descendants of former slaves would not necessarily be owed anything, since an inheritance is a voluntary transaction between the parent and child. But Boxill's argument completely circumvents this by framing the failure to pay debt as a transgression upon the descendants of slavery themselves, since they are by definition in a position different than they would have been in had the transgression never occurred.
* Likewise, the descendants of former slave masters have acquired property or wealth that was not justly acquired by their parents, which is the justification for why they are the individuals to be held accountable for such a transgression; it is a return of wealth or property which was never justly acquired in the first place.
##### Caveats and Limitations
Trying to form my own arguments against reparations because I have to!
* **Morally Arbitrary Argument:** The most direct argument against reparations is that they would a form of enslavement in itself (according to Nozick's interpretation of taxation). Being born into a family that had a former slave owner in it's family tree is morally arbitrary to the individual, since they can't really "choose" whether they are born to them or not. While they are not necessarily "responsible" for the actions of their parents, they are nevertheless held responsible for this action since they are the ones paying for it. If they are not choosing to take upon this role by their own volition, yet they are nevertheless held accountable for such a transgression, how can this form of taxation be justified when the majority of other forms of taxation under Nozick's view are unjustifiable?
* **States' Responsibility:** If an unjust transaction has occurred and the transgression is the result of the state, it becomes ambiguous as to who should be responsible for compensation. This argument can be used if the state is *complicit* in perpetuating slavery, like the passing of the Fugitive Slave Act as part of the Compromise of 1850, but not directly enforcing slavery. But a more blatant example is something like the internment of Japanese citizens during WWII, which would constitute a violation of Japanese citizens' natural rights (liberty/mobility), since this was something enacted by the federal government, it is unclear as to who will pay/compensate victims of the transgression. This is not necessarily an argument against reparations as a whole, but instead illustrating the limitations of Boxill's theory.
* **Mobility Argument:** A core principle of libertarianism is freedom of mobility, if individuals are free to exit the country, they may simply leave the country and move to one which does not have an extradition agreement (e.g., the Bahamas), rendering reparations ineffective. The only way to circumvent this and make reparations effective is to prevent such individuals from freely leaving the country, but this is a restriction on individual rights and subsequently leads to a conflict in values.
* **Utilitarian Argument:** [[Libertarianism#Temporal Framing/Counterfactuals|See: Counterfactuals]]. Note that a libertarian would disregard an argument of this nature, since according to a libertarian, rectification of a transgression takes precedent over the resulting effects on the welfare of the victim.
# Week 14
## *Mills, The Racial Contract*
~