**The Silent Age** is a [point and click adventure game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adventure_game#Point-and-click_adventure_games "Adventure game"), developed by [Danish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Denmark "Denmark") [indie game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indie_game "Indie game") studio House on Fire,and released for [iOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IOS "IOS"), [Android](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Android_\(operating_system\) "Android (operating system)"), [Windows Phone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Phone "Windows Phone"), [Kindle Fire](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kindle_Fire "Kindle Fire"), [Windows](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows "Windows"), [Mac](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OS_X "OS X"). The game's story focuses on a janitor who is plunged into a task of saving humanity from an [apocalyptic event](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_catastrophic_risk "Global catastrophic risk") by using [time travel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_travel "Time travel"), discovering the future that will come about if the event is not prevented.

At it's core, that's all that the game is really about. You sit down, click through the puzzles, and through the power of Joe Smith and the time machine, you save humanity from the dystopian nightmare that is the future. But the game is terrifying

# Summary
## Prologue
When you click play, a sequences of images that could **barely be called a prologue** show the protagonist's previous occupations.
- 1965. A man is seen painting what is supposed to be a ship.
- 1968. A number of men are seen armed, holding what are clearly Vietnam War-era rifles.
- 1969. A man is seen standing in the rain, advertising for an all-you-can-eat buffet.
- 1971. The man is depicted, for the first time, with a mustache, and is holding a mop inside a men's restroom.
Before we finally reach 1972, the present. 

There is no "Star-Wars"-like introduction that sets up anything. More importantly, we don't even know this character's name. I think that it is a deliberate choice that we know almost nothing about Joe Smith in the beginning - he's an insignificant person leading an insignificant life. The fact that we know what occupations he held, but not his actual name, degrades him and strips him of his personality and humanity - he is quantified and known simply for the labor he provides, and nothing else. Until the scene of him holding the mop in 1971, he looks exactly like any other man around him. He could have been easily mistaken for anyone else, and this is exactly what happens just a few minutes into the game.

## Chapter 1
Joe meets with the president of **Archon,** the company he works for. Archon, as we learn later in the game, is a national defense company, with a dubious attitude towards safety and ethics. But more on this later. The president addresses Joe as "Jasper", even after being corrected by Joe himself. Joe is notified that he's just been promoted, or more accurately, he will just assume the responsibilities of **Frank,** an employee who has just "chose a different career path" that day.

You're given a new access card which allows you to go downstairs, but immediately, something is off. Venturing deeper into the basements of Archon, you discover a blood trail, that eventually brings you to an unusual door, which Joe remarks is "like out of a sci-fi movie". When you finally get the door open, you're introduced to an old man, who incoherently urges Joe to find the past version of himself, and to show him a device that he has - a time machine, before he succumbs to his injuries right in front of Joe. Joe calls for help, but being believed to have been responsible for the man's death, he is arrested on the spot by security, and then brought to the police station for questioning. This concludes chapter 1. 

### Meaning
So what does chapter 1 establish? We're given so little, yet so much at the same time. So let's go over what we learned. 

We know that we're working for an important company, Archon. It's not fed to us explicitly, but we can vaguely get the idea that they're working for the government, or that at the very least, they're an important corporation. And that's basically all we know about Archon at this point. 

However, looking into the meaning of the word "archon" alludes at something much larger than simply a company contracted by the government. An archon, in gnosticism, is any kind of world-governing power, created by the material world. Gnostics from the 2nd and 3rd centuries, who rejected materialism, regarded archons as evil. Archons, a product of the **DEMIURGE,** who was inherently antagonistic to the **SUPREME BEING,** would have been part of a greater system meant to entrap the divine in materiality... in other words, manipulating and distorting the creation of a supreme being, until it is in the image of those who use it for the materialistic purpose, rather than that of how it was intended to be used. 

It's a remarkable parallel to some of the biggest questions regarding ethics in science and technology today. The discovery of nuclear fission led to the creation of nuclear power, an incredibly efficient form of energy production. It also led to the deaths of millions in the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and set the stage for the everlasting "nuke question". The Haber process, involving the use of saltpeter, conferred numerous kinds of benefits unto the world as a leap forward in fertilization of crops, while simultaneously being used in World War I as an advancement in warfare, leading to the deaths of millions of soldiers as the war was greatly prolonged by Imperial Germany's access to the process. Most famously in contemporary times, Ted Kazyncski asserts that the Industrial Revolution and it's consequences have been a "disaster for the human race".

Humans, unlike other animals, possess a thirst and necessity for knowledge, but as with all other human activities, it is corruptible. And the consequences of the scientific advances that the company Archon, which by it's name, is a representation of materialistic gain and corruption, begin to be revealed in the next chapter, "The Future".

Of course, in this first chapter, even as he's dragged off to the police station, our protagonist remains unaware of any of the atrocities or mismanagement occurring at Archon. It's quite likely that he doesn't even know what the word "archon" means. Our protagonist, Joe Smith, is quite literally the average Joe. We saw him in the prologue working menial blue-collar jobs, and his boss doesn't even get his name right. Being a lowly janitor, no one else seems to take Joe that seriously at the company. The boss's secretary dismisses his concerns about the blood, giving him a bandage when he tries to present her with a napkin full of blood that he picked up from the floor. 

Joe's interactions with the old man further demonstrate his lack of agency. He is unable to save him, nor really understand what he's saying. Unable to do anything on his own to save this man, the only help he can offer is calling for someone else to help him. While the developers and storywriters intentionally leave Archon's role in the story ambiguous at this point, Joe's character is painstakingly spelt out for the audience: Joe is not important, not talented, not significant. He works at one of the most important companies in America as a janitor.